[Music]
This is a story about how the world's
most powerful, richest country is slowly
losing its influence.
And it's evident here.
We can see across Brazil, thousands of
Ford cars almost disappear.
Meanwhile, China's BYD is becoming
increasingly common. Ford left a plant
abandoned.
BYD, they modernized the plant. They are
now producing electric cars from Brazil.
It's evidence of the growing connection
between Brazil and China, the B and the
C of the BRICS plus coalition.
This is a group that hopes to rival the
US-led G7.
The most important emerging economies in
the world are the four bricks. Brazil,
Russia, India and China.
My fellow Americans, this is liberation
day.
This mantra, America first has created
an opening. The trade war increased the
solidarity between BRICS nations. The
bricks are now emerging as really the
only global forum that can stand up to
Trump's trade war.
They want a multipolar world in which
there are multiple centers of
geopolitical influence.
But can these countries unite to become
a meaningful global force?
To answer this, it takes an
understanding of how economic power
collided with circumstance and whether
the group can overcome some big hurdles.
But first, the acronym brick was coined
in 2001 by Jim O'Neal, who at the time
was an economist with Goldman Sachs.
I thought it was quite clear that
so-called emerging markets were going to
become more important to businesses and
so I sort of played around with the idea
and I wrote a piece called the world
needs better economic bricks and the
rest is history so to speak. Eventually
it uh went on to be popular among the
governments of these countries who held
their initial summit and established
brick in 2009. The first ever brick
summit is getting underway in Russia. In
2010, South Africa was invited because
it was a major economy on the African
continent.
Over time, more countries started
expressing interest in joining bricks.
China became a major trading partner and
a major foreign direct investor in many
countries across the global south. And a
lot of countries saw this as an
opportunity to elevate themselves
geopolitically as they were not part of
other multilateral groupings such as G20
for instance. Bricks is an inclusive
formation
that has the ability to change the
trajectory of the global south.
Four members joined in 2024 and this
year Indonesia joined as well. So now
there are 10 countries.
10 countries equals economic power.
Look at how the original bricks have
grown compared to the G7 in terms of
global GDP since 2009.
It surpassed the G7 in 2019. Now add in
the expanded lineup and its share is
nearly 40%.
In terms of GDP by purchasing parity, it
has overtaken the G7 countries. The
trajectory is clear. Uh BRICS countries
are growing faster. Their populations
are growing as well for most of them.
This boom in population and wealth has
also given the group more political
might which in turn has made more
countries interested in joining.
Brick's main objective is to challenge
the established world order which
appeared after the end of the cold war.
Russia is definitely interested in more
member states or bricks partly to offset
its relative diplomatic isolation after
2022.
Power was aided by circumstance.
Sanctions imposed by the US and Europe
on Russia are one reason why trade among
the block's first five members rose 40%
to over 700 billion from 2021 to 2024.
Sanctions also contributed to an
increasing amount of all this trade
being done in local currencies.
Look at the red line. That's use of the
yuan bypassing the dollar in China's
overseas transactions.
China represents more than 35% of
Russia's external trade.
BRICS has even talked about a common
currency.
Overall, BRICS countries supports reduce
trade in US dollar as a tool, as a
method to reduce overall western
economic dominance in the global
economy.
China's influence within the BRICS plus
club cannot be overstated.
China is the biggest, most powerful,
richest country in the BRICS group. So
the bricks works as an instrument for
China to improve its economic and
political power on the global stage.
Since before the beginning of the
bricks, Lula has always enthusiastic
about China. Brazil under his first
presidency in 2004 was one of the first
countries to recognize China as a market
economy.
Lula realized that China and Brazil had
very complimentary economies. China
wants to have access to a huge consumer
market and it needs food security that
Brazil can provide.
This graph shows Brazil's exports to the
US. Now we're adding in exports to
China. From 2009, China was Brazil's top
exporting partner. And now it imports
more, too.
So, it's all good, right? Well, there
are some hurdles. For Brazil and other
bricks plus nations, the geopolitics of
trade is complicated.
Trade relationships within bricks are
not as developed as say within the EU.
Bricks is not a trading block or group.
It wasn't meant to be one. Each country
is dealing with the issue of tariffs
individually.
Brazil doesn't really want to pick
sides. Brazil wants to have the ability
to trade with the US, trade with China,
with the European Union all at the same
time.
A variety of tensions between different
bricks members have kept the group from
forming a united front,
but they have managed it with the new
development bank, which finances
projects across the global south and
provides loans with fewer economic and
political conditions compared to the
World Bank. It's not focused on
advancing Western values and human
rights issues in the same way. small at
the moment but with potential for
growth.
So even as the US steps back from its
role as a global leader, the disperate
nature of the bricks plus coalition is
its weakness. Although size gives it
clout and opportunity, divisions may
keep it from bending the global order
towards its goals. I think it's
difficult for the BRICS countries to
really pursue a joint path on the things
that really matter for them collectively
as well as for the world.
It's very effective as a symbolic
grouping. But how that evolves is
probably going to depend to some degree
how on all their individual economies
do. How they perceive the US is moving
economically and politically and how
seriously they themselves want to move
on big global issues like climate
change, infectious diseases, global
trade and so on.
[Music]